# Self-Assesment and History

As of the time of this writing, I have been in the software engineering field for nearly 15 years. I’ve done work in many different contexts from single person development projects for local businesses, to working in part of a small team building a small portion of functionality for multimillion-dollar development projects for Fortune 100 companies or government entities. Over the years I’ve played nearly every role needed in the Software Development Lifecycle. My roles have ranged from developer, tester, team lead, project manager, requirements gathering, user acceptance testing and more. 

While I have a great deal of experience, in today’s job market there seems to be one requirement that comes above all others. In fact, experience seems to be irrelevant without this key ingredient. Despite the fact I have years of real-world experience, with rare exception getting a foot in the door without a degree is nearly impossible. 

In the field of Computer Science there seems to be a rather precarious dichotomy between experience and education. At times, education and experience work hand-in-glove to bring about the best in each individual. However, just as often, experience and education are at odds with each other leaving a recent graduate unprepared for what awaits them in the real world.

## Education vs Experience: Battle Royale
Throughout my career I’ve worked in many different roles. More often than not I’ve been a lead of some sort. Sometimes I’m an effort lead, others a team lead or project manager. I was a manager in the traditional sense for several years. In every situation I’ve had the opportunity to assess the performance of my peers and subordinates. Many times, I’ve worked with people who, like myself, did not have a degree. Instead these people have dedicated themselves to learning the state of the art and keeping up with current trends in technology. I’ve spent a good deal of time working with recent college graduates who have no experience.  

Having hired many individuals, I’ve noticed there is a distinct dividing line between candidates. It’s not whether or not they have an education, degree, or years of experience. It’s in their love of the craft. All too often people begin an education with the intent of becoming employable. They look for the good paying career path and study to go in that direction. This person works hard gets good grades, and even knows a few things. However, when push comes to shove, the recent graduate with a Computer Science degree has little more to offer by way of real skills than the average high school student. When faced with a challenge without a defined solution, these individuals struggle greatly. Moreover, when the work strays outside the lines of their study, these individuals find themselves completely lost and underwater. There is a vast difference between doing academic work that checks all the boxes and digging into the material to understand why things are the way they are.  

On the other hand, those of us who have the love of the art want to learn for the sake of learning. We yearn for the chance to stretch ourselves with a good challenge. I, personally, love having to dig and work hard to figure out how to do something new. Real world experience carries more knowledge than traditional education. Mistakes in the workforce have consequences, innovation is greatly valued, and working as a team outweighs any individual contribution. In four major areas of Computer Science, education and experience would seem to be at odds with eachother.

**Collaboration**  
Collaboration is an area in which education and experience tend toward opposite ends of the spectrum. In education, “academic honesty” rules the yard. I essence a student must do their own work. When the student gets stuck and needs help it must stay within the confines of that philosophy. Exams, assignments, and papers are all scanned for originality. Each student must prove they did their own work or there are consequences.  
  
In the real world there is no such restriction. Experience necessitates efficiency. In a collaborative environment a project is dependent on the results of each member in the team. When a team member hits a bump in the road and requires help, they are encouraged to seek help quickly. The team member rendering aid is encouraged to give as much information as possible, going so far as to give the full solution. Learning is balanced with productivity.  
  
This is one of the greatest struggles for a recent graduate in the workforce. They are often loathed to admit they need help. That certificate on the wall means they should know all they need to know. The recent grad will struggle with a problem far longer than necessary because they have been forced to do their own work for so long. In the reverse situation the recent grad tends to give incomplete answers when asked for help. They will point the asker in the right direction in order to maintain integrity.

**Innovation**  
Innovation is a struggle for education. The purpose of education is to ensure participants have the same base is understanding and skills. This serves as the foundation for future endeavors. For the most part, it works well. Generally, a recent grad will have a basic understanding of practices related to their study. Unfortunately, the nature of foundation building stifles innovation.  
  
While original work is demanded of each student, that work must stay within an expected range. Materials and resources leveraged in education are often years behind the state of the art. New ideas are often actively discouraged, even punished in the form of bad grades. In computer science, this means a person with only education is woefully under prepared for the reality of life in the workforce.  
  
Experience, again, stands on the other end of the spectrum. If there is a better, faster, easier way to do something it must be pursued and exploited. Rather than limit innovation, experience rewards and encourages innovation in all areas. It is vital that an individual adopt a posture of driving to a new idea in an effort to achieve progress.

**Algorithms, Data Structures and Standard Practices**  
Education, particularly in Computer science, is about theory. A computer science student is expected to understand how things work under the hood when it comes to programming. This is a good thing for the most part. Having an ability to visualize the data while building out an application makes a better programmer. A well-studied developer is able to make sound decisions in design and implementation.
  
Unfortunately, education circles place so much emphasis on a student mastering the ability to create a data structure and write a sorting algorithm the student often loses sight of the bigger picture. Through experience we learn that reinventing the wheel is a huge waste of time. Modern programming languages contain several variations of the basic data structures as part of their standard library. Leveraging these saves time, energy and effort and leads to more maintainable code.  
  
Maintainable code is the purpose behind implementing standard practices. It is an area in which education is ill-equipped to prepare a student for the work force. While it is possible that a class will have a requirement for code structure it is impossible for a class to be completely devoted to a single standard. Coming back to the originality principle required in academics, standards mean uniformity. When two students, working on the same homework apply the same standards for formatting, commenting, variable declaration and method creation their code will be very similar, if not identical.  
  
Two people structuring a solution the same way is the ideal in the workforce. Experience tells us that uniformity leads to maintainability. Thus, code that is built by one person can be maintained by another. This is vital to continuity and the ability for work to progress through personnel changes. Where education must avoid strong standards in an effort to promote originality, experience tells us that standards are of utmost concern.

**Security**  
In the workforce, security is the primary concern in any application development. This security encompasses all layers: contract negotiations, safe coding practices, data security, access controls (both physical and programmatic), and so much more. Real world experience forces a developer to work in a security first mindset. The workstation must be continually patched, antivirus, full drive encryption, and other security tools present and running. These security steps are of more importance that performance in the hardware as lack of these tools can lead to theft of intellectual property, corruption of data and other maladies that may compromise the ability to complete the project.
  
In education circles, even in computer science, security is not of paramount concern. Beyond requiring a semi-annual password change, there are very few requirements for security on the network within an educational setting. Concerning secure coding practices much handwaving is made, but little in the way of actual training on what secure practices mean. When APIs and standard libraries are leveraged in an academic setting, they are often several releases out of date, many of those patches being security related. The student, becomes used to leveraging these deprecated APIs without knowing there is an issue, is lost in the workforce when the tools they know are no longer allowed in the box.

## Experience and Education: A match for the ages
**Collaboration**  
My current company values diversity and inclusion. We know that in today’s environment every individual is a person who may come up with the next winning idea. Their background lends to the set of ideas and ideals which make them capable of great things. Every project is a team project and with very rare exception, there are no lone wolves.  
  
While education may be lacking in collaboration for creation of output, education goes a long way in laying the groundwork for creating a diverse, inclusive and collaborative workforce. Many students are required to take classes such as diversity studies to gain perspective on understanding and treating people as individuals. Going beyond classes, opportunities exist within ever class in the form of interaction with many individuals. It is impossible to work through a four-year education and not gain a stronger perspective of individuality which will lead to stronger teamwork and better collaboration.  
  
**Innovation**  
Higher, farther, faster. Bigger, stronger, better. Catch phrases of the modern world. Any company who is not innovating in some way or another is falling behind. There are very few industries, even fewer companies that can continue to do business without changing their business practices and products.  
  
Where computer science is concerned, for the most part education is trapped in the bronze age. Theory doesn’t tend to change over time, implementation is where change happens. However, the individual seeking an education is forcing change on themselves. It is in this manner that an education prepares an individual and readies them for experience.  
A student must gain knowledge in a wide array of subjects to gain accreditation. Being forced outside of comfortable areas means new ideas. These ideas may bring about insight into an area which is in desperate need of something new. Suddenly, education becomes paramount to innovation. Experience enables the “how” of innovation, education explains the “why”.  
  
**Algorithms, Data Structures and Standard Practices**  
Being trapped in the bronze age forces the computer science student to re-invent the wheel during their education. Over and over again students write by hand the best sorting method, a binary tree, a doubly linked list, and so much more. The student will write comments on code for no other reason than to show they know what it does. Repetition and conformity bring about the best grades. Real world experience turns these practices on their head. The need to be efficient outweighs everything else. 

Hard skills, those skills directly related to the field, are not all that matter in the realm of experience. Standard practices are often anything but standard. Every company has their own way of doing things. Code formatting, platforms, languages, environments even design patterns are all up to the whim of the people at the top. For many people, work in the field means working with many different companies. In this case, education lends itself very well to the set of soft skills needed to be adaptable to the real-world experience.  

Every student will have to adjust to a new set of criteria for acceptable performance with every class they take. The student who is best able to adapt is best able to perform. Here is where the experience of education is even better than the experience of the real-world. The need for flexibility and quick adaptation in academia enable a person in the computer science field to be well prepared for the variance in the real world.

**Security**  

# In a nutshell, experience + education = solid skills
